# An EMG based cost effective Prosthetic hand 


**Rajdeep Saha, Abhijit Biswas, Saradwat Sen and Sayani Dhali**

**Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institution, 11, Khan Road, Mankundu, DistrictWest Bengal, Hooghly 712139, India**

**Abstract** In the era of assistive technology, the need for affordable
and accessible prosthetic solutions has been roaming around forever. We
introduce the solution by making an inexpensive prosthetic arm
controlled by electromyographic (EMG) signals obtained from the upper
arm muscles of amputees. This project addresses a major global issue
which is, in an estimate over 100 million individuals worldwide require
prosthetic limbs due to limb damage or amputation. Unfortunately, a
large portion of these individuals (especially those from lower economic
backgrounds) face problems accessing due to the high cost of traditional
prosthetic options, which can range from Rs70,000 to Rs3.5 lakh for
imported prosthetic hands. But this project is Remarkably
cost-effective. The overall system costs around a few thousand rupees
significantly reducing expenses compared to market alternatives. This
project solves the solution by using cost-effective technologies in the
most efficient ways. The key component in this prosthetic hand is the
Muscle EMG sensor. The noise reduction and the amplification of the
Bio-Potential signal is done in the IC of the EMG sensor, which helps in
precise signal acquisition. By integrating this sensor into the
prosthetic hand design, the component can accurately capture muscle
signals and translate them into commands for prosthetic hand movements.
The brain of this prosthetic hand is a microcontroller, which serves as
the central processing unit for signal processing as Band-Pass
Butterworth IIR digital filter and responsiveness. Through confined
algorithms and real-time data analysis, the microcontroller reads EMG
signals captured by the sensor, enabling full control of the prosthetic
hand. This integration of hardware and software makes the project\'s
goal of affordability without compromising performance possible. Beyond
the technical aspects, this project solves the topmost prioritized
problem which is affordability with efficiency. In third world countries
where a large portion of people are suffering through poverty, surgery
on amputation is nowhere near possible, let alone installing
prosthetics. This cheap but effective alternative which costs around
1-3% of the market\'s product cost, can be affordable to the mass
population with disabilities and enhance their quality of life.

**Keywords:** EMG Signal, Bio-Potential Amplifier, Band-Pass Butterworth
IIR digital filter

**1. Introduction**

Prosthetics are artificial devices that compensate for the lack of
existence of limbs throughout the body. A prosthetic arm replaces the
amputated or inoperative upper limbs. This offers individuals who have
lost limbs a chance to regain mobility and independence. Now unlike
traditional prosthetic arms, a Myoelectric Prosthetic arm is
controllable by myoelectric (EMG) signals expediently. This is made
achievable by the fact that amputees\' neuro-muscular systems continue
to function normally even after amputation. After appropriate
processing, the leftover signals are utilized and are sufficient to
control the arm\'s movement. \[16\]. The technical approach of Sudesh
Garg, Kiran Rathi, and Amit Kr. Bansal is concentrated on creating a
3D-printed bionic arm that prioritizes human control via EMG sensors,
affordability, and usefulness. It is possible to fabricate objects that
are lightweight and customizable by using PLA and 3D printing
technology. Evaluating for necessary hand movements guarantees usability
and imitation of natural hand movements. The objective is to offer
amputeesÂ an affordable and easily obtainable option that prioritizes
controllability and enhanced quality of life. However, noise filtering
methods are not specifically mentioned \[9\]. Furthermore, to separate
muscle signals from outside interference in EMG-based systems, noise
filtering techniques are crucial for precise bionic arm control as well
as improved user experience and safety.

The research aim focuses on decreasing external noise interference that
occurs during signal transmission from the brain to the skin of the
targeted muscle location. We successfully reduced this interference by
utilizing the Butterworth digital filter, which guarantees more precise
and more accurate signal capture. This advanced filtering system is
indispensable to improve the prosthetic device\'s overall reliability
and effectiveness.

The merit of the following research lies within the cost factor of the
prosthetic arm. It has been estimated that there are roughly 0.62
amputees in India per thousand population \[17\]. With that number of
amputees, we are aware that the traditional EMG-controlled prosthetic's
pricings are way beyond affordable for the lower-income groups. This
cheap but efficient controllable prosthetic arm will be viable for every
individual regardless of their monetary situation.

In addition, we have added a manually operated radical feature that
makes it quite effortless for users to hold a pen and write. With the
help of this unique feature, people with upper limb disabilities can now
write with greater confidence and ease.

**2. Methodology**

The initial step involves using dry surface electrodes to gather EMG
data from the patient\'s hand. For EMG sensors, three electrodes are
employed: two for recording the signal and one as a reference. When
targeting specific muscles like the forearm, one electrode is placed at
the muscle\'s center, and the other at a distance of 1.5 inches. The
reference electrode is positioned on the bony side or the back side of
the forearm.

To minimize electrode-to-skin impedance, the electrodes are pre-gelled.
Before applying the electrodes, the skin is sanitized. The collected EMG
data are then analyzed to detect forearm movement and distinguish
between hand states such as flexion and extension.\[15\]

**2.1 Acquisition of signal using Muscle BioAmp Band**

Three electrodes are used here to capture the EMG signal from the muscle
of the forearm. Two of them are bipolar surface electrodes and one is a
reference electrode. Then the signal is sent to the Muscle BioAmp Candy
through BioAmp Cable and then to the Arduino Nano for further
processing.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="2.77380905511811in"
height="2.77380905511811in"}

**2.2 Control of The Prosthetic Hand**

The prosthetic hand was designed to assist the hand\'s elbow motions by
using signals derived from wrist motions. The EMG signals were processed
and then delivered as control signals to an Arduino Nano. Wrist flexion
is the signal that is obtained if the person closes their hand or flexes
their forearm muscle.

This results in the motor rotating in an upward and downward direction,
enabling the hands of individuals who are amputated to open and close
the hand, and grasp objects. The Arduino Nano\'s PWM ports are connected
to the motor\'s control input, which is powered by an external source.

![](media/image2.png){width="3.9541666666666666in"
height="2.33125in"}Consequently, the prosthetic hand was successfully
operated using EMG signals that were recorded from the healthy hand.
\[15\]

**\
**

**2.3 Circuit Diagram**

![](media/image3.png){width="4.748031496062992in"
height="4.037878390201225in"}

> Now lets discuss about the circuitry and power management system
> utilized in our project. The whole system has 5 servo motors for
> accurate finger movement, an EMG sensor for muscle signal acquisition,
> and a power bank for portable operation. Each component\'s connections
> to the Arduino Nano microcontroller are discussed below in this
> project.
>
> **Servo Motors (Thumb, Index, Middle, Ring, Pinky):**

-   Each servo motor is connected to the Arduino Nano for control.

-   Signal wires (usually PWM) from each servo are connected to digital
    pins (D2, D3, D4, D5, D6) of the Arduino Nano.

-   Power for each servo is drawn from the 5V port of the Arduino Nano.

-   Ground connections for each servo are made to the GND port of the
    Arduino Nano.

> **Power Management (Power Bank):**

-   The power bank used is a \"Reconnect Power Hub 10000 mAh Power Bank
    Series 100\".

-   The power bank is connected to the Arduino Nano via its USB port,
    providing power to the entire system.

> **Write Switch:**

-   One toggle switch is connected from Vin to D7.

-   By turning it on the hand will enable the user to hold a pen and
    write with it.

> **Muscle BioAmp Candy(EMG Sensor):**

-   The EMG sensor used is a \"Muscle BioAmp Candy\".

-   The output side of the EMG sensor is connected to the Arduino Nano.

    -   The analog output (Out) of the EMG sensor is connected to analog
        pin A0 of the Arduino Nano.

    -   Ground (GND) of the EMG sensor is connected to the GND port of
        the Arduino Nano.

    -   VCC (power) of the EMG sensor is connected to the Vin port of
        the Arduino Nano.

-   The input side of the EMG sensor is connected to the EMG band.

    -   REF, IN+, and IN- ports of the EMG band are connected
        accordingly to the REF, IN+, and IN- ports of the EMG sensor.

This circuit diagram effectively illustrates the interconnection of
components within the

EMG-controlled prosthetic hand system

.

**3. Components and Parts Used**

**3.1 Muscle-BioAmp-Candy**

Muscle-BioAmp-Candy is a candy-sized Electro Myography (EMG) sensor
designed to capture precise muscle bio-potential signals. With a compact
size and functionality, this device can transform the way of monitoring
muscle activity.

It has a fixed gain of x2420 and a Band Pass filter spanning from 72Hz
to 720Hz, Muscle-BioAmp-Candy ensures signal clarity and accuracy.

Compatible with standalone ADCs such as the ADS1115 or any
microcontroller development board equipped with an ADC,
Muscle-BioAmp-Candy offers seamless integration into your existing
setup. \[1\]

![](media/image4.png){width="3.9793350831146106in"
height="1.7692300962379703in"}

![](media/image5.png){width="5.463888888888889in"
height="3.6534722222222222in"}**Schematic Diagram-**

**3.2 Muscle BioAmp Band (EMG Band)**

Stretchable in nature, the Muscle BioAmp Band (EMG Band) can be linked
to the Muscle BioAmp-Candy via a BioAmp Cable that uses dry electrodes.
It makes it simple for you to capture your muscle signals.\[14\]

**Dimensions:**

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="4.166666666666667in"
height="1.6111111111111112in"}

![](media/image7.jpeg){width="4.628183508311461in" height="1.5625in"}

**3.2** **Arduino Nano**

![Arduino Nano Simplified
Pinout](media/image8.png){width="3.6979166666666665in"
height="2.1891666666666665in"}

Arduino Nano is a small, breadboard-friendly development board based on
an ATmega 328P SMD package microcontroller and offers the same
connectivity and specs as Arduino Uno in a small package. In our
project, we are using it because the size is the main factor. After all,
the microcontroller needs to be fit into the 3d printed hand. We are
supplying the power to the board with a Mini B USB port present on it.
\[2\]

**3.3 SG90 9 g Micro Servo**

![](media/image9.png){width="3.470411198600175in"
height="2.9746391076115484in"}![](media/image10.png){width="2.68878937007874in"
height="2.946806649168854in"}

SG90 9 g Micro Servo is tiny and lightweight with high output power. The
servo motors are used for the movement of the fingers in the hand. The
servo motors usually provide control over the 180Â° range. This angular
position control is controlled by the PWM technique so by varying its
duty cycle we can control the angular position of the motor. This servo
motor can lift a maximum of 1.6 kg when suspended at a 1cm distance from
the shaft. \[3\]

![](media/image11.png){width="4.166666666666667in"
height="3.0520833333333335in"}Every 20 ms, the servo examines the pulse.
The servo can be rotated to zero degrees by a pulse with a width of 1 ms
(1 millisecond), to ninety degrees (the neutral position) by a pulse of
1.5 ms, and to 180 degrees by a pulse of 2 ms.. \[13\]

**3.4 Power Bank**

![](media/image12.png){width="3.25in" height="1.702380796150481in"}

Here we are using Reconnect Power Hub 10000 mAh Power Bank Series 100.
It has a capacity of 10000 mAh, so it can be used for longer intervals.
As the microcontroller, servo, and Muscle-BioAmp-Candy draw very little
power on a full charge it lasts for about 10hrs. \[4\]

**3.5 Fabrication of 3D Printed Hand**

Here we used PLA because PLA is a common 3D printing material to print
components. PLA is widely used because of its ease of availability,
ecological footprint, and affordability.\
PLA is a biodegradable substance derived from food crops like sugarcane,
corn, and jowar. Here are some key characteristics of PLA and the 3D
printer \[9\]:

**Table 1:** Features of PLA\[9\]\[10\]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **S.N.**    **Property**                    **Value**
  ----------- ------------------------------- ----------------------------
  1           Melting Point                   Low (150Â°C and 180Â°C)

  2           Thermal Expansion               Low (68 Âµm/m-K )

  3           Layer Adhesion                  Moderate

  4           Heat Resistance                 Low(55--65 Â°C)

  5           Tensile Strength                High(39.9 MPa to 52.5 MPa)

  6           Compressive Strength            High (48.2 MPa to 62.0 MPa)

  7           Dimensional Accuracy            High
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Figure 1 Electrodes placement for signal acquisition

**Table 2:** Features of 3D Printer\[11\]

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Model**                           **Ender 3**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Physical dimensions                 \(w\) 40 cm x (d) 22 cm x (h) 46 cm

  Maximum printing area               \(w\) 20 cm x (d) 22 cm x (h) 22 cm

  Wire diameter                       0.2mm

  Nozzle diameter                     0.4mm

  Platform temperature                \~100 Â°C

  Nozzle printing temperature         \~200 Â°C

  Cooling method                      Air Cool

  Motor drive                         Stepper Motor Drive
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Figure 2 Flow diagram of the process

Now let us discuss the specification of the 3D Printed Hand

**Table 3:** Technical Specification of 3D Printed Parts\[12\]

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **No.**           **Name of the     **No. of          **Length (cm)**
                    parts**           joints/parts**    
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  1                 Thumb finger      2                 5.6

  2                 Index finger      3                 7.5

  3                 Middle finger     3                 8.2

  4                 Ring finger       3                 6.8

  5                 Pinky finger      3                 5.4

  6                 Palm              1                 9

  7                 Wrist             \-                11.5

  8                 The diameter of   \-                9.3
                    the end of the                      
                    wrist                               

  9                 The total length  \-                28.7
                    of the arm                          
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Figure 3 Circuit Diagram of The Prosthetic Hand

![](media/image13.png){width="4.689584426946632in"
height="3.0212642169728783in"}

![](media/image14.jpeg){width="2.8645833333333335in"
height="2.8645833333333335in"}

**4 Algorithms and Their Detailed Analysis**

**4.1 Algorithm of the Arduino Code**

> **Initialization:**

-   Set up the system parameters including the header files, sampling
    rate, baud rate, and pin configurations.

-   Initialize the communication interfaces (e.g., Serial) for
    monitoring and debugging purposes.

> **Setup:**

-   Attach the servo motors to their respective pins and set their
    initial positions.

-   Define the WritePin

-   Configure the EMG sensor input pin and any auxiliary pins required
    for system operation.

-   Define the threshold voltage (different for each person)

> **Main Loop:**

-   Check WritePin is High or Low

> If High, Rotate the thumb, index, and middle finger as such it can
> hold a pen for writing purposes
>
> If Low, Continue to the next steps

-   Continuously sample the EMG signal at the defined sampling rate.

-   Apply a band-pass Butterworth IIR digital filter to the raw EMG
    signal to extract relevant muscle activity within the desired
    frequency range.

-   Compute the EMG envelope using an envelope detection algorithm to
    estimate the magnitude of muscle activation.

> **Gesture Recognition:**

-   Compare the normalized envelope value with a predefined threshold to
    determine muscle activation and gesture recognition.

-   Implement a hysteresis mechanism to prevent rapid toggling of the
    hand due to noise or minor fluctuations in muscle activity.

-   Define specific thresholds for opening and closing gestures based on
    individual user characteristics and preferences.

> **Servo Control:**

-   Based on the detected gesture:

    -   If the muscle activation exceeds the closing threshold:

        -   Close the hand by rotating the servo motors to the
            predefined closed position.

    -   If the muscle activation falls below the opening threshold:

        -   Open the hand by rotating the servo motors to the predefined
            open position.

-   Implement a gesture delay to prevent rapid and unintended toggling
    of the claw in response to minor fluctuations in muscle activity.
    \[1\]

**4.2 Algorithm for Envelope Detection-**

1.  Subtract the previous EMG signal value from the sum.

2.  Add the absolute value of the current EMG signal to the sum.

3.  Store the absolute value of the current EMG signal in the circular
    buffer at the current index.

4.  Update the data index to point to the next position in the circular
    buffer, wrapping around to the beginning if necessary.

5.  Compute the average of the EMG signal values in the circular buffer
    by dividing the sum by the buffer size.

6.  Multiply the average by 2 to scale the envelope signal.

7.  Return the computed envelope signal.

**4.3 Algorithm of EMG Band Pass Filter**

Algorithm for the Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter:

1.  **Initialization**:

    -   Initialize the state variables **z1** and **z2** for each filter
        section to zero.

2.  **Filtering Process**:

    -   For each input sample:

        -   For each filter section:

            -   Calculate the intermediate variable **x** using the
                difference equation of a second-order IIR filter.

            -   Update the output using the calculated **x** value and
                the previous state variables.

            -   Update the state variables **z1** and **z2** for the
                next iteration.

3.  **Output**:

    -   Return the filtered output.

Here\'s a breakdown of the steps within the filtering process:

-   For each filter section:

    1.  Calculate the intermediate variable **x** using the difference
        equation:

x = input - a1 \* z1 - a2 \* z2

where **input** is the current input sample, **z1,** and **z2** are the
previous state variables, and **a1** and **a2** are the filter
coefficients.

2.  Update the output using the calculated **x** value and the previous
    state variables:

output = b0 \* x + b1 \* z1 + b2 \* z2

where **b0**, **b1**, and **b2** are the filter coefficients for the
output.

3.  Update the state variables **z1** and **z2** for the next iteration:

z2 = z1 z1 = x

Repeating these steps for each input sample, obtained the filtered
output of the Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter. \[1\] \[5\]
\[6\]

**4.4 General Difference Equation of** **Band-Pass Butterworth IIR
digital filter**

The code implements a Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter using
second-order sections (biquads). Each biquad represents a second-order
IIR filter section. Let\'s break down the mathematical expression for
each biquad.

The general difference equation for a second-order IIR filter is:

*y*\[*n*\]=*b*~0~â*x*\[*n*\]+*b*~1~â*x*\[*n*â1\]+*b*~2~â*x*\[*n*â2\]â*a*~1~â*y*\[*n*â1\]â*a*~2~â*y*\[*n*â2\]

Where:

-   *y*\[*n*\] is the output at time *n*

-   *x*\[*n*\] is the input at time *n*

-   *x*\[*n*â1\] and *x*\[*n*â2\] are the previous input samples

-   *y*\[*n*â1\] and *y*\[*n*â2\] are the previous output samples

-   *b*~0~â,*b*~1~â,*b*~2~â are the feedforward (numerator) coefficients

-   *a*~1~â,*a*~2~â are the feedback (denominator) coefficients

Let\'s express each biquad in the code as difference equations:

**First Biquad:**

z1_1\[n\] = x\[n\] - 0.05159732 \* z1_1\[n-1\] - 0.36347401 \*
z2_1\[n-1\] z2_1\[n\] = z1_1\[n-1\] y_1\[n\] = 0.01856301 \* z1_1\[n\] +
0.03712602 \* z2_1\[n\] + 0.01856301 \* z2_1\[n-1\]

**Second Biquad:**

z1_2\[n\] = y_1\[n\] - (-0.53945795 \* z1_2\[n-1\] - 0.39764934 \*
z2_2\[n-1\]) z2_2\[n\] = z1_2\[n-1\] y_2\[n\] = 1.00000000 \*
z1_2\[n\] - 2.00000000 \* z1_2\[n-1\] + 1.00000000 \* z2_2\[n-1\]

**Third Biquad:**

z1_3\[n\] = y_2\[n\] - (0.47319594 \* z1_3\[n-1\] - 0.70744137 \*
z2_3\[n-1\]) z2_3\[n\] = z1_3\[n-1\] y_3\[n\] = 1.00000000 \*
z1_3\[n\] + 2.00000000 \* z1_3\[n-1\] + 1.00000000 \* z2_3\[n-1\]

**Fourth Biquad:**

z1_4\[n\] = y_3\[n\] - (-1.00211112 \* z1_4\[n-1\] - 0.74520226 \*
z2_4\[n-1\]) z2_4\[n\] = z1_4\[n-1\] y_4\[n\] = 1.00000000 \*
z1_4\[n\] - 2.00000000 \* z1_4\[n-1\] + 1.00000000 \* z2_4\[n-1\]

Where:

-   *z*1*~i~*â\[*n*\] and *z*2~*i*â~\[*n*\] are the state variables for
    the *i*-th biquad at time *n*

-   *x*\[*n*\] is the input at time *n*

-   *y~i~*â\[*n*\] is the output of the *i*-th biquad at time *n*

This set of equations describes the mathematical expression for the
given Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter implemented in the
provided code. Each biquad contributes to the overall filter response,
and the output of one biquad serves as the input to the next biquad in
the chain.\[5\] \[6\] \[7\]\[8\]

**5. Testing and Results**

**5.1 Simulation of BPF in MATLAB**

Here we have simulated the Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter in
MATLAB. First we have shown the unfiltered EMG signal acquired from the
hand which consists of different frequencies (45Hz, 60Hz, 90Hz, 100Hz
and 160Hz) and noise.

![](media/image15.png){width="4.672918853893264in"
height="2.475495406824147in"}

And here we have shown the EMG signal after passing through the
Band-Pass Butterworth IIR digital filter.

![](media/image16.png){width="4.084247594050743in"
height="2.1553958880139983in"}

And this is the frequency response of the Band-Pass Butterworth IIR
digital filter with -3db point which has a sampling rate: 500.0 Hz,
cutoff frequency: \[74.5, 149.5\] Hz\[5\]\[6\]
\[7\]\[8\]![](media/image17.png){width="4.695125765529309in"
height="1.2828248031496063in"}

**5.2 EMG signal, Detected Envelope and Threshold Value**

![](media/image18.png){width="6.258333333333334in"
height="2.7666666666666666in"}

**\
**

**5.3 Testing of the Prosthetic Hand**

We tested the prosthetic hand with 10 people who have healthy hands and
we got these accurate results. We tested 3 things here first how
accurately it can grab an object then how accurately it can close and
open the hand.

To have better gripping capability we used hot glue to have a better
gripping capability in the most probable contact points when trying to
grab any object.

Here are some images that shows how the prosthetic hand looks when at
rest and flexed.

To test the accuracy of grabbing any object we have used a round object
and a cylindrical object as shown in the Figure 22 and Figure 21.

![](media/image23.jpeg){width="5.183333333333334in"
height="2.9166666666666665in"}![](media/image24.jpeg){width="4.478472222222222in"
height="2.5194444444444444in"}



**\
**



**References**

1\. GitHub - upsidedownlabs/Muscle-BioAmp-Candy: A candy size
ElectroMyoGraphy (EMG) sensor for precise muscle bio-potential signals
recording. (n.d.). GitHub.
<https://github.com/upsidedownlabs/Muscle-BioAmp-Candy>

2\. Arduino NanoÂ  - Soldered (Without Cable). (n.d.). QuartzComponents.
<https://quartzcomponents.com/products/arduino-nano-v3-0-soldered-without-cable?_pos=2&_sid=2bf3b65a9&_ss=r>

3\. SG90 Servo Motor Datasheet. (n.d.). https://components101.com/.
Retrieved March 24, 2024, from
<https://components101.com/sites/default/files/component_datasheet/SG90%20Servo%20Motor%20Datasheet.pdf>

4\. Reconnect Marvel Spiderman 10000mAh PowerBank, Li-Po battery, 1 USBB
output port, Micro USB & Type C dual input, BIS approved, Mobile
Accessories- DPB102 SM Online at Best Prices in India - JioMart. (n.d.).
JioMart.
<https://www.jiomart.com/p/electronics/reconnect-marvel-spiderman-10000mah-powerbank-li-po-battery-1-usbb-output-port-micro-usb-type-c-dual-input-bis-approved-mobile-accessories-dpb102-sm/590041746>

5\. scipy.signal.butter --- SciPy v1.12.0 Manual. (n.d.).
<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.signal.butter.html>

6\. Iyer, S. V. (2020, November 30). Digital Filter Design using Python
for Power Engineering Applications. Springer Nature.
<http://books.google.ie/books?id=jx8MEAAAQBAJ&pg=PA125&dq=https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/tutorial/signal.&hl=&cd=2&source=gbs_api>

7\. Verma, N. K., & Ghosh, A. K. (2018, July 31). *Computational
Intelligence: Theories, Applications and Future Directions - Volume I*.
Springer.
<http://books.google.ie/books?id=i_pmDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA94&dq=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterworth_filter&hl=&cd=2&source=gbs_api>

8\. *Digital filter*. (2023, December 11). Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_filter#Direct_form_II

9\. Garg, S., Rathi, K., & Bansal, A. K. (2023, April 1). Development of
3D Printed Bionic Arm Controlled by EMG Sensor. SKIT Research Journal,
13(1), 13--18. <https://doi.org/10.47904/ijskit.13.1.2023.13-18>

10\. Gao, G., Xu, F., Xu, J., & Liu, Z. (2022, October 10). Study of
Material Color Influences on Mechanical Characteristics of Fused
Deposition Modeling Parts. *Materials*, *15*(19), 7039.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma15197039

11\. Hsueh, M. H., Lai, C. J., Wang, S. H., Zeng, Y. S., Hsieh, C. H.,
Pan, C. Y., & Huang, W. C. (2021, May 27). Effect of Printing Parameters
on the Thermal and Mechanical Properties of 3D-Printed PLA and PETG,
Using Fused Deposition Modeling. *Polymers*, *13*(11), 1758.
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13111758

12\. Sakib, N., & Islam, M.K. (2019). Design and Implementation of an
EMG Controlled 3D Printed Prosthetic Arm. *2019 IEEE International
Conference on Biomedical Engineering, Computer and Information
Technology for Health (BECITHCON)*, 85-88.

13\. *What is a Servo Motor? - Understanding the basics of Servo Motor
Working*. (n.d.).
<https://circuitdigest.com/article/servo-motor-working-and-basics>

14\. *Muscle BioAmp Band (EMG Band) \| Upside Down Labs Store*. (2024,
March 18). Upside Down Labs Store.
https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/muscle-bioamp-band/

15\. (2021). EMG sensor based control strategy for hand function
movements using 3D prosthetic hand . *Journal of Cardiovascular Disease
Research*, *12*(03), Article 0975--3583, 0976--2833.
https://jcdronline.org/admin/Uploads/Files/624418536e9b14.69166253.pdf

16\. Jun-Uk Chu, Member, IEEE, Inhyuk Moon," A Supervised
Feature-Projection-Based Real-Time EMG Pattern Recognition for
Multifunction Myoelectric Hand Control", IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, vol. 12, no. 3, June 2007, p. 282-290

17\. *A Report on Amputees in India \| O&P Virtual Library*. (n.d.).
<https://www.oandplibrary.org/op/1986_01_016.asp>
